That made me dizzy.
All right.
So, that was me touching my
overhead press for the first time in a
very very long time.
Haven't done it for a very long time
because I do a lot of barbell work with
my bench pressing. And usually, I would
say that dumbbells have a better
carryover for overall strength and
muscle development, which is why as a
powerlifter, I'm always going to want to
include my bench press in my
programming. And right now, I've got no
need to do an overhead press. I consider
that a seated dumbbell shoulder press is
superior to a standing barbell press in
terms of muscle gain and strength
development. So, for me, because I'm not
competitive, there's a few negatives
that I'm going to mention about the
overhead press, which is why I don't do
it. Not a bad exercise, great exercise,
and I think it's super cool to be strong
in an overhead press. That's the first
time I've done it in a very very very
long time, and it's quite common that
the first time back is a familiarization
phase, where the first week sucks and
next week I'll be able to do more, and
it kind of increases pretty quickly. The
reason why I don't do it, my main
objective is I'm 44 years old and I want
longevity. I want to be strong. I want
to be muscular and lean and look good
and all of those things. And I just know
that a seated dumbbell press is superior
for that task. The reason you would do a
barbell press is, of course it makes you
strong, but so does the dumbbell work.
But I would say that the reason you
would want to do a barbell press is if
you compete in overhead pressing sports
such as strongman or weightlifting. But,
you know, for me, I've done these things
not because I compete in those events,
but because it's kind of just like one
of those things like it's not a bad idea
to just want to be good at gym stuff.
So, gym stuff, some of the lifts, the
most common lifts that people compare
themselves to other people with is
things like a bench press, a squat, a
deadlift. You don't have to be a
powerlifter to benefit from those
exercises. But other exercises could
include a barbell press, a pull-up, a
dip, you know, a front squat. Like these
are lifts that you don't have to be a
competitive lifter to just, you know,
talk the talk with your fellow
gym-goers, if you know what I mean. So,
for me, my overhead press, my best press
ever was 175 kg kind of with that
technique. And I'll talk to you about my
technique now. And I'll talk to you a
little bit about why I don't really do
over head pressing tutorials. I'm not a
overhead pressing athlete. So, my
expertise in this event is very little.
It's always been used as an accessory
exercise. I got to admit, I'm pretty
damn good at it. But the reason I'm good
at it is because my upper body's strong
from all of the pressing work that I've
been doing, as well as, you know, my
priority for having balanced strength on
all planes of motion. So, push and pull
on horizontal, incline, and overhead.
But like I said, usually I just do
dumbbell work. Well, currently I'm just
doing dumbbell work because I find it to
be superior. So, let's talk about what
is not good about that press. A lot of
people would look at that and say, "You
didn't really lock it out." So, like,
"Okay, sure." I don't need to lock it
out. I'm not a competitive lifter in
terms of, you know, overhead sports. I'm
a bench presser. I use it cuz it's cool,
but also as an accessory exercise to
help my bench press. So, locking out was
never a priority. If I was a competitive
lifter, I would lock out. And in fact, I
have had one competition where, you
know, people in Australia, in the
strongman federation, saw that I was
quite strong overhead and invited me to
do a log press record. At the time it
was 160 kg, and I had 8 weeks' notice,
and he said, "Do you think you This is a
Aaron Scarborough from one of the gyms
in Melbourne, in Australia. He was the
event coordinator. And he said, "Do you
think you could beat 160?" And I said,
"Well, I could strict press that, so I
could give it a try." So, I started my
journey for log pressing at that point.
And if you have a look at the video,
we'll put it up here, the technique that
I used was terrible. So, when you guys
ask me to show you an overhead press
technique, sure, I'm going to show you.
But I want you to understand, a lot of
the the purists, the weightlifters, and
even the strongman will pick it apart
and say, "You can't do that because
there's no lockout or whatever it is."
So, come and check this out. There's a
few steps here that I teach people and
it makes them stronger straight away.
Firstly, it's the grip. If you notice, I
use a false grip or a thumbless grip,
right? So, the reason why I do that is
two reasons. One, it allows me to place
the barbell on the strongest part of the
palm of my hand, which is in line with
these two forearm bones. When you wrap
the thumb around it, it's in a much
weaker position. It kind of like
misaligns the barbell from your forearm
bones. There's a way of doing it, of
course, so it's strong, of course. But
it's just strong when I do the false
grip. Whenever I work with people and I
introduce a false grip for a overhead
press, they tend to like it as well, and
you can try it at home. So, why would I
do it here and not a bench press? Well,
if I drop the weight here, I can kind of
get out of the way. There's always a
risk, don't get me wrong, but I can
always get out of the way. With a bench
press, you can't get out of the way. So,
kind of teach yourself to wrap your
thumb around the bar for safety. So,
overhead press, false grip. The second
thing that you may have noticed is I
don't go as wide as my bench press. My
bench press is index finger on the outer
ring of a powerlifting bar or
nose-picking finger on that line there.
That's as wide as you can go, and
there's an advantage for going there,
and that is you reduce your range of
motion in a bench press, and probably in
any press. But I say, even for a bench
press, if you can't arch, you won't be
able to pull your shoulder blades back
and down as far as they need to go to be
able to support this wide grip. You need
this position for that wide grip. I'm
not arching maximally for my overhead
press. So, a rule that I have is no
arch, no wide grip. When I use a wide
grip, I'm moving my arms out to the
side, my shoulder blades should move
with it into shoulder blade or scapula
retraction. I need retraction of the
scapula so that this joint here, which
is the glenohumeral joint, it's the
scapula is the ball and socket. So, the
scapula is the socket, the shoulder
blade, that's where the socket is, and
the head of my upper arm bone is the
ball. And what I want is for my shoulder
blade to cradle or the socket to cradle
the head of the humerus so that I can
load it with heavy weights. So, to do
that with a wide grip, you need to
position your shoulder blades in maximal
contraction, which requires a certain
degree of arching, specifically the
thoracic component of your spine, which
is your upper back, needs to be extended
or arched. So, remember that, no arch,
no wide grip. I'm not arching, so that's
why I typically don't recommend maximal,
you know, legal bench pressing grip for
a an overhead press. The most I go is
usually kind of pinky on that line with
a false grip. The next thing I do, it's
just sort of something I've always done.
You'll see my setup, and a few people
have copied it with success. I kind of,
you know, this is me psyching up. I kind
of rock back and forth and I time it. I
come underneath it, bang. You don't have
to rock back and forth, but I go I step,
and then I get both of my feet at the
same time.
Bang.
Right?
One step, so my foot's in position.
Boom. I get my whole body under it. And
the way that I rack, I've got a belt on.
If you have a look, I've got a double
belt, so this is what's allowed in
strongman. So, it's a soft belt with the
normal powerlifting belt over the top of
it. I'm doing this to support my spine.
So, I refer to this technique as like a
standing bench press because I kind of
lean back excessively. And the reason
why I do that is because with log
pressing, which is the competition that
I train for in strongman, you know, you
can't hold the bar here in line with
your neck because it's a 12-in diameter,
right? So, basically, to place the log
on your neck, you need to be looking up.
You can't be looking straight ahead with
the log out here. It's not on your
center of your base of support. It needs
to be in line with your midfoot. So, to
get in line with your midfoot, you need
to lean back and put your head up and it
rests on your neck. So, that's how I
practice all of my barbell pressing with
my head up and kind of leaning back,
hence why I called it a standing bench
press. So, that's how I unrack it. I get
my grip, you know, I time myself. Boom.
That's it. That's That's my thing. You
don't have to do that. But basically,
what you want to do is end with your
feet directly underneath the bar. And
then when you come up, I'm looking up
for the unrack. So, I go Here's the next
thing that's pretty hard, and a lot of
people are going to disagree, which is
why I typically don't do these
tutorials. I hold my breath from start
to finish. When I exhale in an overhead
press, I feel a strength decline
immediately. Now, there are negatives to
this, and that is this is one of those
exercises that you can very easily
faint. You can very easily pass out.
With a bench press, you're laying down
on a bench. Like there's blood in your
head and it's circulating. A lot of the
times when you hold your breath, you
lose the blood supply the blood
circulation to your head. And so, I
don't know, some people at home may have
been able to put in the comment section
that you fainted before from overhead
pressing as well. Right. So, that's why
I don't recommend it, even though for
me, it's just black and white, it is
stronger. And so, therefore, I have
safety precautions when I do it. So,
I've got the grip, I come underneath, I
take a big breath from under, and then
from here, I'm very quick. So, I've
practiced this so many times, but that's
what I practice from the warm-up sets to
the top sets. I go from here, up. Okay,
so it's the same as a squat, one step
back, two to the sides. So, that's the
recommendation for a walking out of
squat is three-step walkout. Why
three-step walkout? You want to do as
few steps as possible. So, why not two?
Because if you go two steps, you're
going to go one step to the side, and
these plates are going to bump onto that
rack. So, what you need to do with a
three steps is one step back, and then
two get in your stance. So, I've
practiced it so many times, I'm quite
quick at it. So, I'll go I'll hold my
breath, up, one step back, and then two
to the sides. And then from here, I'm
on. Boom. Boom. Boom. All right? So,
that was me, you know, I just had the
number five in my head. Now, I don't
know how that looked. I haven't watched
it back, but I felt shaky there. So,
that's the risk. Like, I felt like if I
kept on going, I could have gone to
sleep and fallen over and it wouldn't
have been nice. So, that's how I felt. I
felt shaky. Now, what are the
precautions that I make? Well, the best
precaution that you can make is what I
don't have access to here. It's a power
rack. Set up the safety bars up high and
kind of like just unrack it from here,
boom, boom, and then just let go and and
walk out of the rack. That's how I used
to do it when I had access to a power
rack, but I don't do that now. So, what
I do, I shoulder press on my
weightlifting platform with bumper
plates so that if I feel dizzy, I just
drop it immediately.
So, I'll pump out five reps and a lot of
the times, if you guys have followed me
in the past on my Instagram, if ever
you've seen me do a big PB for my 175,
I'll put it up here. Yes, it wasn't
locked out and this is why I don't like
this is exactly what I said. Every time
I do a big overhead press, you know, you
get someone in the comment section
saying, "Oh, it doesn't count because
whatever." No, that's right. None of
them count. It's in the gym. I just use
these exercises because they're cool.
That's all. And nothing more. I'm not
competing. When I did compete, I got
punished for not locking it out, but I
actually rectified the situation. So, I
did my 161 press, I put it overhead and
the ref in front kind of looked at me
and he's got his hand up looking at me
because he's a really good guy. He
didn't want to fail me, but he didn't
want to give me the lift if I didn't
earn it. So, he's looking at me going,
"Sorry, mate." And I, you know, went to
lock it out and then I dropped it.
Anyway, I walked off and someone screams
out, "30 seconds!" So, in powerlifting,
you don't get a second chance. You do
your lift. You've
got 60 seconds to
complete the lift. So, I came back, ran
in, I forgot to put my belt on. So,
we'll put the video on and you'll see. I
forgot to put the belt on. So, I just
muscled it. I picked it up and I just
looked up, standing bench press like
this, and because I didn't have my belts
on, like when I have the belts on, it
really helps me brace my core. And when
I lean back, it's really strong. No
belt, I'm leaning back, I just felt it
in my lower back. So, no major injury,
but my back was sore for a couple of
weeks from that, from excessively
arching under 161 kg. But anyway, that's
why I use the double belt. That's why I
hold my breath and on my top sets, when
I'm going really, really heavy, you
know, I gauge by feel. Just then I was
with it enough to be able to re-rack
that weight. But when I'm going for my
big sets, like I've done reps on 160,
I've done my best is a triple on 160. I
think I'd re-rack that, but it could go
either way. When I did my 175, I was
kind of like here
boom, and then I just dropped it. I
don't know how I felt. I could have felt
like passing out, but I didn't want to
be around to guess because it goes
really, really quickly. So, I don't
recommend that breath hold. For me, I'm
always going to do it and if you want to
get the most out of your lifts, it comes
with a big risk, but it is damn well
stronger. Anyway, that's the technique.
I hope you enjoyed it. I'm going to show
you one more time. Thumbless grip, you
know, don't go wide. For me, my maximum
grip that I use is pinky on the line of
a powerlifting bar. You know, this is
this is my thing. It's nothing that you
have to do. Some people copy it. For me,
it works. It's just how I build
momentum. I come in
I'm still looking up. I don't lock it
out, which I'm sure you notice and want
to tear apart. Five reps, boom, and then
down and I'm like, "Don't pass out.
Don't pass out." Boom, re-rack. And then
I have a habit of holding on to that bar
just in case I wasn't sure if I had
passed out or not and I just keep on
holding on just in case I do. Uh but
that's my overhead press tutorial for
you. For you guys who every single time
I post something valuable on YouTube
because that's what I want to do. I want
to post where I feel like I'm in a
position to post. My overhead press, I
know I've got a big overhead press, like
175, which you guys say didn't lock out,
sure. The only official one that I've
ever done is a 161 log press to take the
Australian record in the 105 class,
first ever competition. That was
official, but the reason why I'm strong
overhead is because I've always placed
an equal emphasis on my like as a
powerlifter, I'm a bencher. So, that's a
horizontal push plane. But something
that I teach everyone that I work with,
if you're a powerlifter, include
vertical push plane to create balance in
your shoulders. And the same goes for
strongmen or weightlifters or overhead
press athletes, I teach them to include
horizontal pressing as accessories to
maintain shoulder strength and balance
on all angles and not just pressing,
pulling as well. So, vertical push pull,
horizontal push pull, and an even
amount. I've always done that. So, my
best dumbbell press, I'm very good at
seated dumbbell presses as well. My best
dumbbell press is three reps on 80 kg in
each hand and I'll put that video up
here as well. So, it's like, "How did
you get so good at overhead press?"
Well, I've got a 250 kg bench press, so
I strengthen the hell out of that. Those
are the same muscles that you're using
overhead. It just is. Your triceps, your
delts, and in a bench press you're using
more of the pecs, which is why I can do
250 in a bench press and way less than
that in overhead press. But that's why
I've got a good overhead press just
because I've always strengthened every
part of my body. Yeah, and I think
that's it. Yeah, one more thing is
stance. That's what I didn't address.
For me, I use elevated heels, not for
everybody. The reason I use that is
because I've got very poor shoulder
mobility. And when I press overhead, I
can't get that lockout with flat-soled
shoes. That's what I did in the comp
where that I almost failed and then I
figured out in training after that, but
which I did a 165 log press in training
with these, with a few extra tips on leg
drive, which is very poor again. So,
this is strict pressing and my leg drive
was nonexistent. It was literally bend
the knees and up on the toes. That was a
tip that was given to me by my very dear
friend, Graham Hicks, who's the owner of
a 220 kg log press. Yeah, he gave me
that tip and I used it and it's like,
"Whoa, I just did 165." I'll post it
here as well. But for me, I use these
elevated heels, poor shoulder mobility,
it allows me to get that lockout. But
one technique was I used to shoulder
press with my feet here. So, I just used
to walk straight back with two steps and
my feet were quite narrow and I'd do my
overhead pressing like that. And Dmitry
Klokov gave the advice to me to use a
wider base of support. If you guys know
who Dmitry Klokov is, he's also very
strong. He's an Olympic, this sucks,
he's a silver medalist. And it's like,
"Oh, only a silver medalist?" Well,
let's add context to that. He got the
same total as the person who got gold,
but he was slightly lighter in body
weight. So, he was the best in the
world. He's got the best total in the
world in that weight class, which I
think was 105. I don't know what the
weight classes are. I think 105. Uh but
silver medal because he didn't get he
got beaten on body weight, on on
Sinclair total, which is the formula.
Anyway, he said to stand wider. So,
since then it was kind of like, "Ah,
that makes sense." So, since I started
standing wider, right? False grip,
breath hold, wider stance, looking up.
There's my tips for you. You know, speak
to a weightlifter, speak to a strongman
and they're all going to say, "That guy
doesn't know a about overhead."
Maybe not, but I've got a very strong
overhead press and every time I've
taught anyone these techniques, they are
also very good at it. And there's not
many people that can press, you know,
175 overhead strict. Anyway, I hope you
enjoyed. For those of you who kept on
saying waiting for this overhead press
tutorial, here it is. Not very
technical, but hey, it's just lifting,
you know, technique is important for
sure, but at the end of the day, being
strong is a big part of the technique,
don't you think? And that was definitely
my my best attribute when it came to
overhead press. I was just very strong.
Hope you enjoyed. If there's any other
tutorials that you want me to give you,
you know, like I said, I stay in my
lane, you know, I'll give you bench
press tutorials. I think my technique is
really, really good for benching and
coaching for squats and deadlifts and
that's why I teach you guys all of those
techniques and program design. This is
stuff that I've studied for decades at
the highest level. That's what I bring
you. I don't want to step out of my
lane, but here I am stepping out of my
lane with an overhead press. So, I hope
you enjoyed. Click like, subscribe. See
you next time.